01/04/2023
#Things I want to know


A standard operating procedure (SOP) is a procedure that is specific to your company or organization that describes the activities necessary to complete a particular task. Some would say that writing an SOP is both a science and an art form. There’s a lot of truth in that. I have to admit that I’ve seen a number of approaches for writing SOPs, some that I liked better than others. I’ve seen SOPs that to say were “minimalist” would be an overstatement. I’ve seen SOPs that could be considered novels. I’ve also seen the impact of poorly-written or non-existent SOPs.


SOPs are a primary way to implement or enforce a policy. Policies are intended to steer an organization to achieve the mission, vision, and goals of an organization, but without SOPs, are not actionable. SOPs also encourage consistency in execution, which is critical for demonstrating compliance with or achievement of targets described in a service level agreemen

Keep it simple. Keep in mind that especially at the Service Desk, the SOP is likely to be referenced while handling a customer contact. The SOP should augment and reinforce training; it is not a substitute for training.
SOPs must be portable. Even if an underpinning application or tool is changed, the “what, when, and why” generally will not. This is why I use work instructions to map the SOP to the underpinning tool.
Flowcharts and diagrams tell a story. People learn and interpret information in different ways. Some people like to read about how something should be done, others like to see “the big picture” and then read the details. Having a flowchart or diagrams (as appropriate) is a great way to quickly communicate what activities are addressed within the SOP.
Consistency counts. Develop and use a consistent format or template to help make the SOP consumable.
It’s about the audience. However you write your SOPs, keep in mind that you’re writing them for your audience. If the SOP does not work for your audience, your SOP doesn’t work. Conduct regular periodic reviews of SOPs with the people that use them to identify and incorporate improvements.